---
id: library-intro
title: Welcome to The Library
sidebar_label: Introduction
slug: /
---

## A growing knowledge base

There have been **over 3,000 distinct jobs written** for the OpenFn platform,
driving efficiency across the social sector. These jobs have run millions of
times, connecting and automating critical technologies like CommCare, DHIS2,
Salesforce, Kobo Toolbox, and more.

**90% of at-scale OpenFn customers make their jobs publicly available** so that
other organizations can learn from their implementations, yet we‚Äôre still
constantly asked to find examples of jobs that ‚Äúcreate DHIS2 entities from
CommCare cases‚Äù or ‚Äúinitiate payments when Kobo submissions arrive‚Äù.

The Job Library is our attempt to make this vast pool of real-world experience
available to everyone, automatically collecting and organizing non-sensitive job
scripts from this diverse community of social sector integration experts to make
data integration safer, faster, and more scalable than ever before.

## How can you contribute?

In the **Project Settings** page for one of your OpenFn.org projects, select
flip the **"Job library sharing"** switch and you're good to go! There will be a
slight delay between the time you share your jobs and the time the appear on
this site, but in about half an hour, at most, you'll be able to find your
published jobs here.

N.B.: If you want to share a project, but **keep certain jobs private**, you can
do that too. Navigate to the job in question and click the administrative
settings cog in the top right corner (the same place you'd disable "console.log"
statements) and select "Make this job private."

## Library "scores"

Jobs published to the library from OpenFn.org users may be well-written and
clearly documented. They may serve as very useful templates for other users to
write their own jobs, or copy and paste them entirely. Or... they may not!

In order to help members of the community get a sense of whether or not a
particular job in the library is a "good example", we provide a **score** that's
calculated based on some job metadata from the OpenFn platform. It takes into
account many factors, including things like how recently the job was written. In
addition to the scores, we also provide two quick visual indicators:

### Scrolls üìú are from core contributors

Jobs with scrolls next to them have been manually added or edited by a core
contributor to this repo. Think of them as official examples. In _most cases_
this means that the spells... errr, scripts you see in there are great places to
start.

### Sparkles ‚ú® are scoring over 75

Jobs with sparkles next to them are currently scoring over 75. That's all. We
can't vouch for them, but they might be more useful than jobs without sparkles.

### How to interpret a score

Everything you see here has been shared because _someone_ thought it might help
the broader community. If a job has a high score it's because our model thinks
it might be helpful, too! This might be a good time to review rule #1 and rule
#2 about models/algorithms.

1. All models are wrong.
2. But some models are useful.

We hope this one is useful. In conclusion, **the higher the score, the more
useful the job _might_ be.**

## What's next?

We're planning to expand both the API and the library searching/browsing
experience in the future. We'd like to provide a way for users to "upvote" or
"downvote" certain jobs (think: StackOverflow) which they found useful. Get in
touch if you're interested in helping out!
